of the day. Temperatures are lifting
a bit across southern areas. Further
north, where fog is slow to lift its
going to be quite a cold day. The
second half of the weekend we have
weak weather fronts moving
northwards, so pretty cloudy out
there. There will be patchy rain,
most of it running through the Irish
most of it mnning through the Irish
Sea,
most of it running through the Irish
Sea, northwards into Northern
Ireland, and eventually into the
South West of Scotland. The
A demonstration took place
against the police...
..which degenerated into totally
inexcusable violence.
This is a sustained campaign...
Hands off!
..against black people...
Hands off! Hands off!
..and today we will say
enough is enough!
Hands off!
Hello and welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel we have:
Oliver Dowden, former policy adviser
under David Cameron,
elected as an MP in
2015, currently BorisJohnson’s
Secretary of State for Digital,
Culture, Media and Sport.
Labour’s Shadow Foreign
Secretary — she left
Jeremy Corbyn’s front bench in 2016
and ran for the leadership
of the party eartier this year,
Lisa Mandy.
Mathematician, author, senior
lecturer at University College
London, and presenter of TV
programmes on a range of issues from
coronavirus to climate change,
to finding love online — Hannah Fry.
Joining us tonight to help us
discuss the American election,
a former vice president of the
Republicans Overseas, psychologist
and chief executive of a strategy
firm, Jan Helper—Hayes.
Simon Wilson, boss of the fashion
and homewares chain Next, where he
has worked for nearly 30 years.
He has donated to the Conservative
Party in the past and currently sits
as a Conservative peer
in the House of Lords.
And joining us down the line
from Mexico, former Hollywood
actress, author and Time Magazine’s
Person of the Year in 2017
for her role in the Me Too
movement, Rose McGowan.
APPLAUSE.
Good evening, welcome to my panel
here in the studio, thank you
forjoining us.
And thank you very much
to Rose and Jan, who are
joining us down the line,
and to our audience tonight,
our virtual audience.
You all come from Lewisham,
orthereabouts, in
south—east London, an area I know
very well as I went to schooljust
round the corner.
Very good to see you.
And welcome, of course,
to you at home.
Thank you very much for watching,
and dojoin in the
conversation the usual way, at BBC
Question Time on social media.
Right, let’s get our first question,
which is from Tom Adams.
Good evening, panel.
Whether Trump wins or loses
the Presidential election,
he has gained many more votes
overall than 2016.
Does this show that his message
resonates more than ever
with the American people?
Lisa?
Igu
es '
slmup?
Ah, I was going to...
Well, you will be up in a minute,
Jan, or you can kick
us off, if you like.
You’re chomping at the bit,
let’s hear from you.
Well, yes.
The thing is that the pollsters said
that there was going to be a blue
wave and we were going
to lose seats.
Instead, the support
for Trump has gone...
We call it going down ballot,
and it has had a wide impact.
Right, yes, he’s certainly...
Lisa, it’s a fair point that Jan
makes, that the polls
were showing that Biden
was going to win reasonably easily.
That’s not happening at the moment.
We still don’t know who’s
going to win, of course,
but Trump has increased,
more people have voted for Trump
this time than they did last time.
Yeah.
I think what this has shown
is that America is a very
deeply divided country.
The 2016 election revealed huge
divisions in American society
and my impression from the turnout
figures, Joe Biden is on course
to win more votes than any
presidential candidate in history,
but Donald Trump has also increased
the number of votes that he’s got.
The impression that I get
from the results that are filtering
in is that those divisions now
are deeper than they
were four years ago.
It’s been a very, very difficult
time in American politics.
And what does that say about
the appeal of the left in America?
I think what it says is that we’ve
had a president over the last four
years who has sought to stoke
division rather than calm those
tensions and we’ve seen a lot
of that sort of politics,
that populist style
of politics, seeping over
here to the United Kingdom.
Don’t forget, of course,
thatJoe Biden once famously
described Boris Johnson
as a political and emotional clone
of Donald Trump and we’ve seen those
attempts by this government as well,
to stoke those tensions,
to start culture wars and we’ve
had a very, very angry,
divided debate over Brexit as well.
But the thing is, Trump
has appealed to people?
Well...
There’s no getting away from that.
It’s easier to win votes by stirring
people up against one another
than it is to calm a situation.
I think what this tells us
is that ifJoe Biden wins,
as he’s expected but not guaranteed
to do, then he is going
to have a very, very difficultjob
on his hands because he has to unite
the American people and hold them
together through what is widely
expected to be the worst global
economic downturn in a century.
That is a huge challenge
and that is why I said this week
that Britain has to really
step up now.
Repair those relationships
with the Democrats,
who are seriously concerned
about some of the actions
of the British Government recently
and play our part in helping to make
sure that we do pull together.
The director—general
of the World Health Organization
said recently that the biggest
challenge that we now face,
globally, is not the virus itself
but the lack of solidarity —
at both global and local levels.
So, there is a huge amount of work
to do in Britain has
to play its full part.
So, Rose McGowan, the question is,
does the fact that Donald Trump has
gained more votes than he did
in 2016 show that his message
resonates with more
of the American people?
I think it’s a little more
complicated than that.
It’s not, you know...
I used to be a Democrat.
I’m not a Republican.
I’m kind of in a no men’s [and
but I grew up in a very
unusual way in Italy,
in what they calla cult.
And what I’ve seen now
on both sides is just that.
You know, one side thinks
the other’s a cult, the other side
thinks the other’s a cult
and the answer is that it’s both.
The answer is that the New York
Times, they think they might be more
erudite in telling you that
Hillary’s going to win
so everyone’s shocked
but it’s not really reality.
And the thing is, is that
with the council culture thing
—— culture thing on the left,
which I’ve been a victim of,
I’ve been cancelled many times,
but the thing of it is,
is thatjust by not saying bad words
orjust by thinking a certain way
doesn’t make it that you’ve
actually accomplished anything.
You know, the party line
when I was a Democrat
that I was always fed
was we could accomplish so much
if the Republicans wouldn’t stop us.
Now, I was a lobbyist in DC,
I saw behind—the—scenes.
A lot of them are incredibly similar
and incredibly tight,
the left and the right.
Donald Trump is...
His message isjust,
you know, this isn’t working.
He doesn’t do it well,
he doesn’t speak well,
in my estimation, but he’s appealing
to people that are tired
of being lied to.
Now, he lies as well.
So it’s very confusing but,
in a weird way, he’s a very
sepia, transparent liar.
When he does lie, we can see it.
Whereas the other ones,
they hide it much better.
And I don’t think it’s
as easy as we need to join
hands and sing Kumbaya.
There’s a lot going down
in the US and it’s, frankly,
it’s a weird opinion but it needs
to happen and it’s very sad
but this is two sides,
they’ve been lied to for so long,
that it’s very hard to see
the truth any more.
There’s some hands up
amongst our audience.
Alex?
I was going to agree
there with Rose.
I think it’s very easy to win votes
when you are not held to account
for what you’re saying.
I mean, we’ve seen even
in the past 2A hours,
Trump and his party claiming to have
won elections that they haven’t
and there don’t seem to be any
consequences for that.
I think, again, that’s seeping
into British politics,
where people aren’t held to account
for what they say.
There just doesn’t seem
to be any regulation
of people’s claims in the past,
so it’s easy to win votes
when you just say what people
want to hear and they never have to
follow up on them.
Exactly the same point as Alex.
I think there’sjust
so much misinformation out
there and we are not all starting
at the same base,
with the same truth.
People have so much news from social
media and we don’t know what’s
truth and what’s lies.
So I think it’s just really
important to regulate, again,
what Alex said, so people are not
allowed to say kind of lies
and things like, you know,
world beating test entry
—— and trace system
when they’re not.
And, Simon, when you talk
to people who support Trump,
as Jan does, many will say, well,
that’s patronising to us.
We know what we’re voting for,
we know what we’re hearing
and we like it and don’t tell us
that we’re just being taken in.
Clearly, we don’t know how this
election is yet going to turn out
but what certainly has not happened
is that Biden is not romping home
and Trump has not been
beaten into a corner.
Yeah, look, I don’t know a huge
amount about what the people
in America are thinking.
Lisa seems to be far more connected
to the entire American nation
than I am but it does amaze me that
Trump has done so well.
I think the question we’ve got
to ask is really about the political
class in America and,
potentially, about our
own political class.
We have to remember that Tmmp isn’t
a rareer politician.
He came from outside of politics.
How has he managed to break into
this world and become president?
The answer, I think,
comes down to the lack of connection
between the political class
and what people are thinking.
And part of that, I think,
is that we have moved into a world
where people just aren’t prepared
to speak their mind.
There’s just this lack
of authenticity, this fear...
Well, you can’t say that
of Donald Trump, surely?
That’s right.
That’s one thing he does do.
No, that’s exactly right and I think
that is the only way I can
explain his success,
is that he...
You know, love him or hate him,
and I have to say, I would not vote
for him, but he is authentic.
He is speaking from the heart,
he is speaking his mind.
He doesn’t care what he says,
he doesn’t care about
the consequences and I think that
overly cautious approach that
political classes around the world
are beginning to take and the sort
of half answers that they’re forced
to being given, to give,
means that people like Trump can
suddenly break through
because they’re prepared
to speak their mind.
I think it has to be a wake—up call
to our own political class to say,
come on, speak your mind,
stop following the party line,
stop just saying what you think
you want us to hear,
tell us what you really think.
Well, we’ll be coming to you for
that, Oliver, in a minute.
Tom?
I broadly agree with what Simon said
there but I think what we should be
looking at is Trump’s
messaging has been all around
he’s the protector of the American
people, he’s America first,
he’s the protector of the economy,
he’s there for the average American.
But I think what’s happened
is he’s connected 3 lot
of those things with fear,
the things he says around the fact
that if Biden wins there’ll be riots
and pitting different
groups against each other,
such as immigrants and portraying
them as threats and generally acting
like a bully and being
really divisive.
But I think what concerns me more
is the fact that how easy
is that division to unpick,
even if Trump loses and Biden wins,
are we ever going to get back
to a point in America
where there’s less division
and at a much better point?
Natalie?
I was going to say, I think
with Trump, I’m no fan
but I think he’s very clever.
He’s a charismatic character.
He knows his audience
really, really well.
He knows how to deliver that message
that’s going to land
with them and he’s got a lot
of loyal supporters.
So, I’m really not surprised that
a lot of people have really turned
out to vote for him this time.
50, Hannah, the question is,
whether Trump wins or loses,
and at the moment he’s not
looking on track to win
but we still don’t know,
does the fact that he’s attracted
more votes show his message
still resonates with
the American people?
I certainly think that
when you’re sitting on this
side of the Atlantic,
it is extremely surprising that tens
of millions of people
could possibly vote for Trump.
I mean, I’ve got some basic
expectations from a president.
Don’t make fun of disabled people,
you know, don’t solicit
foreign interventions,
that kind of thing.
I mean it’s really surprising,
you know, I accept that.
But I think wondering why
voters in America didn’t
make the right choice,
as it were, is kind
of the wrong question.
Well, that wasn’t the question.
That isn’t the question.
No, I mean more as in the fact that
people are surprised,
it sort of implies that we’re
wondering why people didn’t make
a different decision and I think
that in a way that’s not the right
way to think about things
because essentially,
you know, you’ve got all these
people who are overlooking concerns
on sexual assaults, concerns on...
Basically, playing fast and loose
with the Constitution
and still choosing him
and I think...
Why do you think they are?
Well, I think it’s not
about whether people
couldn’t be persuaded.
I think it’s about people not
feeling like they’re represented.
I think there are a lot
of people in America
who are very deeply unhappy.
There’s lots of studies
that show this.
There’s a study that demonstrates
that well—being in America has been
declining for 25 years,
particularly in prime age white men
who have lower educational outcomes.
I mean, there are things like,
you know, opioid deaths,
suicides, alcohol use —
all of that is in this group
of people who are also Trump voters.
I think unless you get to the core
of what it is that people
are unhappy about and why they don’t
feel like they are being
represented, I think that’s the only
way that you’ll really answer why
Trump is so appealing.
I mean, obviously that’s
not all Trump voters,
I’m sure Dan would say.
—— Jan would say.
Ricky?
Yes, thanks.
Just going off what Tom’s just said,
I think ifJoe Biden does win,
that’s more than just his first
term, if he goes for a second term,
of rebuilding, really looking
at what a society does —
we have to look after each other.
The divide and conquer
or the division, we’ve
had too much of that.
How can we work for each other?
I put a face mask on to protect
someone else, notjust for myself.
The other point Ijust wanted
to raise was that there
was an interesting piece
on Newsnight last
night about polling.
And how, actually, many people lie
to pollsters about who they actually
are going to vote for and I wonder
whether there’s
something similar here.
Are people open with their political
views, and if not, why not?
Abbie?
Thanks, Fiona.
I mean, my sense is that it’s not
necessarily that his message
resonates with people,
that Trump’s message resonates,
it’s more coming back to the point
that I think Simon made before
around the authenticity
and the transparency that Trump
conveys to some people.
I think people are fed up ofjust
hearing the party line and hearing
politicians come out with very
rehearsed and very scripted
communications and what they’re
looking for is that transparency
and that openness, that perception
of openness, at least.
Where Trump is on Twitter
all of the time, he gives them that,
he gives them that sense
of transparency and that’s really
what engenders their trust.
To me, I think that’s actually more
compelling to people
than his actual message.
This is a fairly unique thing that
may be about to happen in America.
There have only been three occasions
in presidential election history
where the sitting president has not
won a second term of office.
So, this would be a big move
by the American people.
I think there is a danger in this
debate that we give far too much
credence to the idea that this
would be, in some senses,
a victory for Donald Trump.
It would be an almost unique moment
in American history.
Well, we’ve heard two people now
talk about how compelling openness
and transparency and authenticity
is from our politicians,
which is obviously cue...
We haven’t yet heard, we haven’t yet
heard from you, Oliver.
So, I want to hearfrom you.
We don’t want any party lines
tonight, absolutely.
So...
A Trump win would be better
for the Government, wouldn’t it?
No, not at all.
We, in the UK, have
worked with Presidents
from both persuasions.
I’ve seen it myself
when I first started...
I know, but at least you’ve met...
At least the government,
at least Boris Johnson
has met Donald Trump,
hasn’t even spoken toJoe Biden.
Worked very effectively
with Barack Obama for many years.
Theresa May and, indeed,
BorisJohnson have worked very well
with President Trump.
And I’d certainly given up
as a politician trying to predict
elections in this country,
let alone in the United States.
But I think one thing is areal
cause for celebration,
is the fact that the greatest nation
in the world, in terms
of its military power,
its economic power,
is deciding its fate,
not like the most...
Most of the rest of the world,
it’s not being decided
by a political elite.
It’s not being decided by the army,
it’s being decided by the people
of America and I think that’s
a fantastic thing.
What do you think about the fact
that Donald Trump is trying...
Depending on your point of view,
some would say interfere,
some would say correct,
the results coming
in from the election?
He’s talked about fraud,
he’s talked about corruption
and he’s got legal suites
going in a number of states.
We are well used to this happening
in the United States
and it’s happened...
No, we are...
What we’re not used to...
Hang on, what we are not used
to is a sitting president accusing,
saying that the electoral system
is fraudulent and corrupt.
I can’t think of a time...
If you go back to the 2000 election,
similarly it ended up in the courts.
It wasn’t about fraud or corruption.
But what is enduring about
the United States, and indeed this
country, is that our nations
are built on these democratic values
and, in fact, this weekend,
as we look to the Armistice,
those are the values we share.
Those are the values
we fought and died for,
and I’m absolutely sure
that the US Constitution can
withstand either the continuation
or the change of president,
depending on what the American
people decide.
Jan, since you’re being good enough
tojoin us for this part
of the debate this evening,
I just wonder what your response
is or what your view
is of President Trump’s comments
about fraud and corruption
in the electoral system?
Well, there’s a couple of points
that I would like to make.
Trump...
The people that didn’t vote
for Trump in the last election
and voted for him in this election
was because he delivered
on every promise he made.
I have friends who can’t stand
to listen to him and they don’t,
but they support, they vote
for him and...
He hasn’t quite delivered
on every promise.
I mean, the Mexicans haven’t paid
for the wall, have they,
as far as I’m aware?
Um...oh!
SHE LAUGHS
Well, you know...
Every one apart from that one, then?
Yeah, yeah.
But really critical
and for 30 years, actually,
I would even say A0 years,
we have had a very divisive nation
and I don’t believe that Biden’s
going to be able to pull it
together but where Trump made
a mistake is that with Covid,
people were exhausted.
People were hurting and so he didn’t
show enough empathy to reach out
for those people tojoin him.
I agree that sometimes
I just want to say,
"could you keep your mouth shut?"
but he knows what he’s doing.
Az, you have your hand up?
Thank you.
It’s a typical Trump thing.
He’s completely divisive.
This is what he always does.
In the first debate, you saw him
just interrupting Biden constantly
and this is him yet
again doing thse things.
And to say that people are voting
for him more now than before,
it’s just because those Republicans
who didn’t vote last time
are now scared about Biden.
That’s the only reason
that the votes have gone up,
nothing to do with what he’s done.
It’s not his policies.
So it’s a fallacy, sorry.
It is!
Jan, sorry.
It is his policies.
You know, to make that kind
of blanket assumption...
We ended up having,
in the different rallies,
we registered Democrats
who were going to vote for him,
so it’s notjust the Republicans.
And the fear on the Democrats’ side
was because Bernie Sanders
and Alexandria Ocasio—Cortez
were so vocal and have an incredible
following, there was a fear
that we were going to go
really far left.
But what came out was
that they really do believe that
Biden is more moderate and the blue
wave didn’t happen, and they ended
up losing in the House
and in the Senate, but it really
made a statement that the voters
want us to come together more
because we have got to get back
to being moderate.
Rose?
I think what maybe people
don’t quite get is that
America’s not a democracy —
it’s an oligarchy.
It’s run by corporations and as many
Democrats and as many Republicans
have been presidents, really,
in the last 30 to A0 years, it’s
gone, like, on high
in that direction.
You know, yes, do the Democrats
hear what people want?
Yes.
Do they do it?
No.
Because it’s been proven and studied
that only if it’s something
that the corporations want as well,
then it’ll happen, but if it’s
people that want it, "Ah,
there’s other people to blame."
What I continually
hear is Trump bashing.
It’s very easy to bash him.
I’m not saying I don’t,
but I’m saying in this moment,
you know, you’re talking
about credibly accused
of sexual assault.
That’s been really kept out
of the headlines withJoe Biden.
And there’s people that are just...
Which he’s denied,
of course, I have to say.
Of course, alleged.
It’s corruption on both sides.
It’s notjust one, it’s that xcept
one has better optics.
And that would be the Democrats.
Rebecca?
Hi, there.
I’d like to come back to something
I think Lisa mentioned,
that this isn’t a victory for Trump
but at the same time
it’s clearly not a victory
for Biden, outright,
at the moment, either.
And I think that’s something that’s
really important from this election,
I think it enables us to look
a little bit into the future.
Many of the same cultural issues
that are affecting the US,
we see in our own electorate.
And what’s clearly the case
is that these approaches,
just being kind of anti—Trump
and just being less extreme
isn’t cutting through.
So I think there’s something
that needs to be thought
through from our opposition parties,
about how they can actually deal
with some of these issues and bring
people back together.
Caroline?
I was going to go back to Jan’s
point about the coronavirus and ask,
do you think Trump’s attitude
towards the virus has potentially
put Americans off voting for him,
if the vote does go
more towards Biden?
Well, Ithink, Jan, that’s
what you’re saying, isn’t it?
That that’s something that
has perhaps cost Trump?
It did, it did cost Trump.
There were many of his supporters
who voted for him that...
Because in press conferences,
he was up front, saying I need
to be a cheerleader,
I don’t want the people
to get in panic.
But he didn’t come out with any
sensitivity, and I’ll tell
you the other thing that
really has bothered me,
is that in his rallies of the last
few days before we voted,
was he was using himself as,
"Look how quickly I got over Covid
because we have remdesivir."
And that doesn’t make people feel
that he is focusing on getting
things done, because he keeps
talking about the vaccine.
But he’s not saying anything
about the people that have lost
people, and the fact that one month
Fauci was telling us no masks,
then the next month, masks are good.
And he’s the president,
so he’s getting the blame.
But if I could also add —
I don’t know if you have this
perspective, that it’s notjust
Trump that has his lawyers
going, because Biden had his lawyers
going to try to get voter ID off,
no signature needed...
No, no, we’ve seen
that there are legal
cases that have been
brought on both sides.
There is only one person who has
accused the electoral system
of fraud and corruption,
which is Donald Trump,
which is the reason I mentioned it.
Listen, I think we could talk
about the election for some time.
We don’t have the result —
I thought we might get it tonight,
it doesn’t look like we’re going to.
Maybe when we wake up tomorrow,
we’ll have the result.
So I’m going to move onto another
topic, but for now, Jan,
I just want to thank you forjoining
us in giving us your
perspective on this.
It’s obviously very interesting
hearing what you had to say.
Thank you very much indeed.
And, before we carry on,
I just want to mention
that we are looking for people
to join our virtual audience
for programmes to come.
So next week we will be, virtually,
in Dover and the week
after that, Windsor.
So if you live there
or thereabouts, do get in touch
on the Question Time website.
You can fill out the form
there and come and be
part of our audience,
from the luxury
of your sitting room.
You can sit there with a cup of tea.
It would be very good to have you,
so do please get in touch.
Right, let’s take our next question
now from A2, A2 Nandoo.
Thank you, Fiona.
Is the new lockdown going to extend
beyond the 2nd of December,
as this is a pseudo—lockdown
compared to March?
And what do you mean
by a pseudo—lockdown?
It’s...
This is not a lockdown.
In March...
It’s hard to say.
I think everybody’s tired
of lockdowns anyway,
but this is a strange one
where we’ve got children still going
to school and university,
which is great, their education.
But then we’ve got...
It’s a mixed bag, because you’ve got
kids who go to school,
play football with their friends,
then when they go home,
they can’t go and meet their friends
because they’re not in the school.
So they’re already mixing...
Everything we’re doing
at the moment, it’s not
going to change anything.
It’s pretty much the same.
People today, listening
to the traffic reports,
when the first lockdown happened,
the traffic was zero.
Everything locked down,
no shops open, no movement.
Now, today, everything’s exactly
the same as it was yesterday.
And so what you’re asking is,
is the new lockdown,
such as it is, you clearly feel —
you’re calling it a pseudo—lockdown,
is it going to extend
beyond the 2nd of December?
Well, is it, Oliver?
Absolutely.
No, the regulations will expire
on the 2nd of December and it
would have to be for Parliament
to come back and vote
for further measures and we’ve
indicated that we want to go back
to the tiered system.
And I completely
agree with what Az...
Yes, but, in a sense,
that’s important, but it’s
kind of a technicality.
Are you expecting, as
the Government, that the lockdown,
such as we have it, will end
on the 2nd or are you actually
thinking, "Hmm, we’ll probably have
to go back and ask to extend it"?
No, we’re expecting the lockdown
will end on the 2nd,
when the Cabinet discussed it,
and I have to say it was a very
sombre discussion that we had
on Saturday, the clear advice
we had was twofold.
First of all, that if we didn’t
take these measures,
the NHS risked being overwhelmed.
And what that means,
for people watching and listening
at home, is that we’d
be in a situation where people
could turn up at NHS
hospitals and be turned away
for treatment even though
they needed it and we couldn’t
allow that to happen.
Well, people are...
I completely agree with what Az
said, about how fed up
we are with lockdown.
As far as non—elective surgery goes,
people are not getting
that treatment now.
Well, in respect of non—elective
surgery, they’ve actually taken
a lot of measures in relation
to getting elective surgery
back up and running.
But there are some hospitals
where it’s not happening already.
Well, and we cannot have that
happening on a national basis,
which is why we had
to take these measures.
And the second piece of advice
we had was that our understanding
is this will be sufficient
to suppress the R and to ensure
that we can then emerge
from the lockdown at
the beginning of December.
That is why these regulations,
they don’t roll over, they expire.
The Government would have to come
back to Parliament in order to get
afresh consent and we believe
that these measures are sufficient.
Hannah?
Sufficient for what, though,
I think is the question?
Because I think what A2 is saying
is really important,
about how this lockdown just
feels very different.
You walk out in the street, there’s
people everywhere and, essentially,
that is going to be reflected
in the reproduction number.
Last time, we had a reproduction
number ofabout 0.6,
which meant the virus
was radically declining.
This time, maybe we’re
going to be at 0.8, 0.95.
That doesn’t sound like that much
of a difference but it makes
a dramatic difference to how
quickly things turn.
I think that as also picked
up on in that point,
the fact a lot of the messaging
here feels a bit contradictory.
You can play with your friends
in school, but you can’t play
with them after school.
And in the tier system, you can
drink but only if you’ve got a pie
or a chip butty with you.
I think you might have
to have a salad as well.
0h, do you?
0K.
Maybe that was a couple of weeks
ago, it’s easy to lose track!
It would definitely be a pie,
from a Wigan perspective!
And I think that is one
of the big problems
that we are in at the moment, which
is that actually I think people
are struggling to adhere
to the basic measures and, actually,
the adherence is the thing
that is so important.
You know, we’ve had...
There’s been a lack
of consistency too.
I think when we were in spring,
there really should have been
a message that a winter lockdown
was a really strong possibility
and I think with Eat Out to Help Out
and get back to work,
we sort of screeched into everything
being open and now we’re sort
of screeching back into everything
being shut again.
I think that’s really
hard to stay up with.
I think the final thing
to say is that I think
the real focus so far has
been very authoritative.
All the measures have been very
authoritative, right?
It’s like, 0K, Rule of Six,
10pm closing, fines,
we’ll give your name and number
to the police, that kind of thing.
And, actually, lots of the evidence
shows that that doesn’t really make
that much of a difference...
Only about 20% of people,
apparently self—isolated.
That’s exactly right, exactly that.
Only 20% of people who are asked
to are fully self—isolating and,
actually, if you could find out
what it is that is stopping
people from self—isolating
and support them through it,
you know, Ijust think it would make
so much more of a difference.
The effectiveness of that
would be so much greater.
Whereas I think when measures
are presented as though they’re
punitive, I think itjust breeds
resentment and stops people
wanting to conform to them,
exactly as A2 is saying.
Martin?
I agree with the points that Az made
but I would say I do think
we have to take a bit
of collective responsibility here.
I think we’ve arrived at this
lockdown because people have been
breaking rules and not adhering
to the previous tiering
systems that were set.
In fact, unfortunately,
the politicians have a lot to answer
for here and there doesn’t seem
to have been enough full punishment
for when rules have been broken.
So, I would encourage
everybody to step up now.
The quicker we properly follow
these new restrictions,
the quicker we’ll be able
to come out of them.
Ricky?
To reiterate what Keir
Starmer said earlier...
How did we get to this?
People are fatigued,
people are frustrated.
They don’t have any trust,
they don’t have any faith.
And people who I would consider
really straight down the book,
you know, people who are proud
about how they take their collective
responsibility, they are fed
up, bored, frustrated.
They’ve had enough.
We need absolute transparency,
we need clarity and we need
leadership, a road map for how
on earth we’re going to get out
of this, how are we going
live with this virus?
The vaccine is not a silver bullet.
This thing is here.
We’ve got to find a way
of working with it.
And, Mr Dowden, we need confidence
in you and your government.
We absolutely need it.
So let’s start being really,
really clear about this.
There’s no way this is going to end
December the 2nd, so let’s start
being clear about that.
And let’s be honest,
open and find a road map.
We’ve got to work together.
It’s not going to end
on December the 2nd.
Well, I set out the position
that we believe this
would be sufficient.
I think, and many of these
contributors have made
a svery important point,
Ricky and Az and others —
people are fed up with this.
Of course they are
fed up with this...
What about Ricky’s point,
that he hasn’t got confidence?
Well, it is worth noting
that we are not unique
in the United Kingdom.
In France, in Spain, across Europe,
we are seeing the virus come back
during the autumn months.
Now, initially, because of this
fatigue, we wanted to try and ensure
that we could have a tiered system.
Now, that tiered system worked,
and we are getting the numbers under
control, but it wasn’t sufficient.
We saw in places like
the south—west, where the levels had
been flat, suddenly starting
to shoot up.
That’s why we’ve had
to take these measures.
But the point that Ricky
made about other things,
of course the vaccine alone won’t be
a silver bullet.
That’s why we are rolling out mass
testing, so for example
in Liverpool right now,
starting tomorrow, we’ll
be testing everyone,
both those with symptoms and those
not, so that we can start
identifying it better.
And in addition to that,
we are making huge clinical advances
in terms of our treatment.
If you look at the mortality rate,
the number of people that die
from Covid is falling as we make
advances with drugs and others.
So we’re notjust
relying on the vaccine.
This will buy us some space.
On the point of Liverpool,
how is it that a country
like Slovenia, for example,
is able to test 3.5 million people
last week, over a weekend...
Slovakia, sorry, not Slovenia.
And yet and yet — and they’re in no
way as well the country as we are —
and the Government is very proud
of this pilot in Liverpool.
But they’re way ahead
of us, in Slovakia.
First of all, we are doing it
in Liverpool, but it’s also worth
looking at comparisons elsewhere.
We have ramped up...
Well, Ijust give a new one.
How is it they are able to do
something like that and we are not?
If you look at a country
like France or Germany,
most other European countries,
with increased our capacity more.
We are much bigger country
in the United Kingdom.
We’ve gone from about
2000 tests inJanuary
to an availability of 500,000 now,
and we are continuing
to ramp it up further.
That’s been...
We’re not actually doing
500,000, though, are we?
We’re doing much less that.
Deborah?
I’m confused as to why
the Government was listening
to the scientists when they said
that lockdowns really work
when the R rate is lower,
but aren’t we just two weeks too
late for this lockdown?
Alex?
I’m actually a few months’
pregnant so I got a specific
question for Oliver.
There’s been a report released
today which that shows
that in this lockdown,
employers are being left
to their own discretion to decide
whether pregnant women have
to come into work or not,
whereas in the first lockdown women
effectively shielded
when they were pregnant,
given the amount of strain they’ve
already got on their bodies.
What is the Government going do
to protect pregnant women
from discrimination to ensure
they can actually protect
themselves in this pandemic?
I’m going to get round the rest
of the panel, so if you could just
answer that briefly.
I think it’s an important point.
First of all, employers have to make
sure their workplace is safe,
and they are also subject
to non—discrimination laws.
So, they should not be
discriminating against
women who are pregnant
on the basis of them being pregnant.
I’m not...
Does not answer your question, Alex?
Not really.
No, Alex wanted to know
what her rights are,
whether or not she has the right
to not go to work, as she did
in the first lockdown,
because she’s pregnant.
So she has a right to have a safe
place to work, and she should be
able to go in there and work
as a pregnant person.
If she can’t go in there and work
as a pregnant woman, then
she shouldn’t go in.
If it’s not a safe environment,
she shouldn’t go in and has
a right not to go in.
OK, let’s go back to
the original question.
Simon, you haven’t had
a chance to answer that yet.
Is the new lockdown going to extend
beyond the 2nd of December?
And he says this is
a pseudo—lockdown compared to March.
Well, I hope not.
If, you know...
I think we all hope not.
Yes, well, I mean, particularly,
I have to say, you know,
for the country’s economy’s
point of view.
I mean, nonessential retail
has been locked down,
despite the fact that Sage said that
locking down nonessential retail
would have minimal to low
impact, despite that —
and we’ll take that,
and we’ll lockdown, absolutely,
and we’ll do it well.
But if we don’t open in December,
and people can’t get
to the shops in December,
and that business is either
crammed into the last two
weeks before Christmas,
which will create all the crowds
that we are trying to avoid, or,
even worse, we don’t open
at all before Christmas,
that will be a dagger in the heart
to lots and lots of retailers.
I’m very fortunate to work
for a business that could make it
all the way through to Christmas
and beyond with our shops closed,
but many won’t, so I have to say,
for the sake of our economy,
I think we have to open.
And I also think the Government do
have to look at what is high and low
risk, and the idea that we’ve had
to shut all our shops, even though
the Government pulls my own advisers
say that they are low risk
environments does strike me as being
odd, but we’ll live with it.
What I would just say
to the Government now,
and I think this is desperately
important, and I think Ricky made
this point indirectly,
is that we keep hearing
about these silver bullets
that are coming along —
the vaccines, the mass
testings, whatever it is.
I think we have to plan
on the basis that it would be
lovely if it does happen,
but if it doesn’t we have
to get our hospitals
ready for a third wave.
The Prime Minister said last week,
"Look, we can’t double
error capacity overnight.
—— our capacity overnight.
You know, we might run out
of oxygen and beds."
Well, in three months’ time,
if there is a third wave
in February, we have to be ready,
we have to have the beds,
we have to have the oxygen,
the trained paramedics.
If we were fighting a war then
we wouldn’t say, "Look,
we’re going to surrender now
because we haven’t got
the hospital facilities to look
after the wounded troops."
We just wouldn’t do that,
we would make it happen.
And we’ve got to now
get serious about this.
We’ve got to start saying that we
hope these things will come along,
but if they don’t, then we will make
sure that our health service
is ready to treat people,
has the best medicines,
has enough equipment,
enough beds, enough staff.
That’s what we’ve got to do over
the next three months,
because we can live with this
lockdown, but we can’t live
with another one next year.
We have to get out of the cycle.
Lisa?
Whether we come out of lockdown
on December the 2nd I think
is largely in the gift
of the Government and now.
The reason that the Sage scientists
recommended a lockdown
was because it gives us
the breathing space to fix
test, trace and isolate.
50, might I suggest to Oliver
that the first priority ought to be
to take away contact tracing
from those very expensive
private sector firms that
are clearly failing to do that?
They are reaching just over half
of cases in the country,
and handing that to local public
health directors, with
the resources that they need
in order to do thatjob.
They’re currently reaching almost
everybody that they try to trace
because they have significant
expertise.
My own local authority
has brought in people
from the Missing Persons Unit,
in the police, they brought
in people who work in sexual health
who are extremely skilled
at doing this.
The second thing is to get
a grip on communications.
We can’t continue to
have a situation where,
you know, as we’ve heard,
people are extremely
confused about the rules.
And when you’ve got Cabinet
ministers out unable to answer
the basic questions about rules that
have been published for which people
can be fined or arrested,
when you got the Prime Minister that
goes missing, we should be having
daily press conferences again.
BorisJohnson must begin those press
conferences again and get a grip
on the communication...
Lisa, he did a press conference
at five o’clock this evening.
I just watched it...
He did, yeah, and where has he been
for the last few months?
I mean, it really isn’t good enough,
and if you look at most
of the countries in the world,
their leaders are out and helping
people to understand notjust
what the rules are but why
they are being asked to follow them,
because if people understand then
they tend to follow them.
The final thing I would just say
is that that exchange
about pregnancy and rights at work
was enormously frustrating,
because the answer that you gave,
Oliver, is based on this idealised
world in which people can
go to their employer,
that nobody will be discriminated
against, that nobody
will be put under pressure
to come into the office,
and we know that that
just simply is not true,
so the third thing that
I would suggest to you, urgently,
is that people need the right,
help and support to follow the rules
and stay safe.
And that means we need support
for people to self—isolate,
we need people to have proper rights
at work, and we also need to make
sure that we get decisions right
like the furlough quickly.
No government could have
foreseen this pandemic,
and I’m enormously sympathetic
to the scale of the challenge that
you and your colleagues have faced,
but any competent government
would have known that trying
to end the furlough scheme
with a hard cliff edge
was going to be
absolutely disastrous.
We are a real outlier around
the world in terms of that.
And today the Chancellor announced,
finally, that he’s going to do it,
but thousands of people had
needlessly lost their jobs
in the middle of a global pandemic
because of the indecision and delay.
So we have to get far
better at making these
decisions more quickly.
I think Lisa makes a very important
point about people’s jobs
and the furlough scheme,
and that is why, and it’s
important for people watching
the show to understand,
that if people were made redundant
at any point after the 23rd
of September, they can go back
to their employers, get reemployed
and claimed the furlough scheme,
and actually in the overall working
of the scheme — take, for example,
the International Monetary Fund
today said we were a world leader.
We’ve put more resource
into supporting people through work
than virtually any other country...
France gave its citizens
two years, Germany gave
its citizens two years...
Let’s hear from the audience, just
for a minute, because in a sense
you are the people affected by it.
Ricky?
Thanks again, Fiona.
I’m really glad to hear Mr Dowden
talk about we can go back
to our employers and be rehired,
and I will be quoting him
in my e—mail to my past
employers this evening.
I’m self—employed, I’m
a theatre director.
I also teach in drama schools
and universities and youth
groups and such like.
But, like so many people in the arts
and in the cultural industries,
we do otherjobs to pay the rent
in the gaps, and one of mine
was in box office, selling
the tickets to other people’s shows.
And we were very grateful
for the furlough during the summer,
and of course it ended
and we were made redundant.
And I’m really, really
glad for those people
who still have a job
that the furlough has been extended,
but it really came too
late for so many of us,
and I am now risking losing my house
and the whole thing.
It really, really has
destroyed so many people,
not only in the cultural industries,
I’m notjust talking
about theatre.
People across the country,
itjust is so disappointing,
and I use that word to try and be
polite, but we are here today
finding out it has been extended.
This should have been
extended months ago.
This thing is not going away.
We need to support each other.
We need to all be back
for the recovery as well.
You know, we all need to be
there in a job and ready to go.
And, Rose, just get us your
perspective from over the other
side of the Atlantic.
I mean, America has had its own
problems with how it’s handled
the coronavirus pandemic.
How does the UK look to be faring
from where you’re sitting?
You know, I think what’s
really obvious to me
from the other side of the pond,
as it were, is that politicians
giving these hard dates
for lockdowns ending,
you know, you’re fighting...
You’re boxing with a ghost.
You know, Covid is a ghost and it’s
everywhere right now.
And we don’t know where it is.
And so when you get these hard
dates, December2nd,
or things like that,
it’s completely logical to me.
—— illogical to me.
And the furlough thing didn’t work
and so many people have
needlessly lost their jobs,
and it breaks my heart because I
know what the UK is good at.
You know, the UK, the public
has always been great
at pulling together.
Look at you in World War II,
look at you taking the tough hits
for the greater good.
But when they’re completely confused
about what the greater good is,
and that’s because people are not
laying out the right measures
and they are not, you know,
serving their people with some kind
of measures of safety,
and notjust testing.
You know, with financial safety.
You’re ending up where you are,
and I don’t think there can be
a hard deadline to end things,
but there has to be a very
intelligent alternative,
and to include businesses
in that as well.
I know if you make things
clear the public will do
their damnedest to keep it going.
But they have to know what’s up,
and doubletalk right now from any
government is not cutting it.
Rose, I love the fact that your dog
isjoining in behind you.
That’s just a great
slice of real life.
We love to see that.
And very cute it is, too.
David?
Pearl!
Thank you, Fiona.
I’d be really keen to know
what the panel think of the lessons
learned from coming out of the first
lockdown because, you know,
we’ve got a real opportunity
here to review some of the mistakes
that perhaps were made
last time with a view
to avoiding them this time,
so, you know, where we overzealous
in getting people back
into restaurants and pubs?
Did we encourage people back
to the workplace too soon?
Were the travel corridors that
were opened appropriate?
And so on.
Well, listen, we could go
all round you all, but I’m keen
to get one more question,
so let me just hear briefly
from you, Hannah, on that.
OK, so...
I mean, yes to all of the above,
essentially, David.
I think.
It depends what strategy you want.
There are some countries
in the world that have opted
for a zero—Covid, right?
So zero tolerance of Covid cases,
and in that case travel
corridors are a no—no
until you establish a bubble
with another country
that is in a similar situation.
I think the best comparison,
you know, for us, really,
is the other countries around Europe
who sort of kept travel open.
You know, similar size,
similar economies and so on.
And I think the real lessons
from Europe have been...
This is like a runaway train
that is accelerating, right?
And the earlier and harder
you press the brake,
the quicker you bring things
to a halt, and that’s
really what we learned,
I think, from Germany.
I think the other big lesson
from Germany, actually,
was about really tapping into that
sort of collective spirit.
Angela Merkel, when she made
decisions, she made sure she had
all of the local leaders with her,
and they presented it
as a united front.
And I think that that really,
for me, is the big, big lesson here.
We had so much goodwill
in this country.
You know, an epidemic of altruism
we had in the spring.
And I think that’s really
what we should be trying to tap
into now rather than squander.
Let’s get one more question in,
from Rebecca Falconer.
Yesterday, the Bank of England
projected that UK GDP is set
to shrink by 11% by the end of 2020,
one of the worst performances
in the entire world.
Does the panel think the UK can
afford a no—deal Brexit with the EU?
Well, Simon is the
businessman on the panel.
What do you think?
I think a no—deal Brexit pales
into insignificance when compared
to what we’ve just been through.
I think the important thing,
and I hope we do have a deal,
let’s just say that,
but if we don’t have a deal it
really isn’t the end of the world.
Businesses now had three years
to prepare for this.
There is one thing that is going
to be important and will make
the difference between weather
no—deal Brexit has a huge effect
on our economy or very little,
and that is whether our ports
continue to operate well.
If our ports continue to function
well, and all the administration
is in place to keep them going,
then I don’t think we have a great
deal to fear from a no—deal Brexit.
And, from talking to your
colleagues, do you feel
businesses are ready?
I can only speak for the business
that I work for, and we’ve been
preparing for years for this.
We were ready over a year ago,
so I think people have been
working incredibly hard.
And I should say, you know,
the company I work for,
we export and import virtually
everything we sell,
in one way or another.
It’s either come from another
country or sent to another country.
As long as the ports keep working.
And tariffs — you’re not
worried about tariffs
in the event of an ordeal?
I would rather not have tariffs,
and I think there’s an enormous
opportunity here for the Government.
At the moment, the Government’s
stance is "We willjust
raise tariffs on all European goods
to the same level that we have
on the rest of the world",
and the rhetoric from the Government
is "We want a free—trading
in Britain".
If we come out of the European
Union, if we don’t have a deal,
we’ve got a free trade in Britain.
Why not lower those tariffs?
Why does Britain...
Why are we going to persist
with tariffs on goods that come
from other countries where we have
no domestic production at all?
Clothing, over 99% of the clothing
we wear comes from outside the UK.
Why have tariffs on those goods?
Don’t make the consumer pay
the price of a no—deal Brexit.
What the Government should do is,
if in the unlikely and, you know,
hopefully it won’t happen,
in the event that there is no deal,
but lower tariffs on goods
that we have no production of.
Don’t make the consumer pay.
Lisa?
I think a no—deal Brexit would be
an enormous failure,
and I think it would be an utter
betrayal of the British people,
given that we had a Prime Minister
who won an 80 seat majority only
last December by promising us this
oven—ready Brexit deal.
All the way through this debate,
the Government has recognised that
a deal is perfectly possible,
it ought to be possible,
and it would be in the interests
of the country to get one.
So I think it would be areal
failure of negotiation
if the Government wasn’t able
to present us with a deal
at the end of the year.
Would Labour...
And what I would say to Simon is...
With Labour lower tariffs on goods
that we don’t produce?
We would negotiate a deal.
I mean, we simply wouldn’t
be in the situation.
Understood, but in the event
there was no deal...
And, actually, the Government
doesn’t need to put us
in the situation either,
because with a bit of goodwill
on both sides we could see a deal
by the end of the year.
Come on, answer...
What I would say to you,
though, is that it’s very,
very different running a company
like Next — or Heinz
in my constituency —
a major employer with huge amounts
of money and the ability to plan,
compared to the small
and medium—sized businesses
in my constituency, especially
those who deal in things
like perishable goods,
because they will be the ones that
start to go under a very,
start to go under very,
very quickly if we have the chaos
at the ports and we have
all of the barriers and tariffs that
you were talking about.
And you’ve got to recognise that
for a lot of these businesses
there hasn’t been clarity,
there hasn’t been certainty.
They were told to get ready
for Brexit quite some time ago
and then it didn’t happen.
This has been a long period
of uncertainty, and when you add
into that the uncertainty around
Covid you’re creating a perfect
storm for many businesses
with the potential for mass
unemployment as a consequence.
What I would say to Oliver as well
is that there will be some parts
of the country that are much worse
affected than others in the event
of a no—deal Brexit,
and the Prime Minister made two
promises in that election.
He made a promise to get us a Brexit
deal, and he made a promise
to level—up parts of the country,
including my own constituency
in Wigan, that has seen relative
economic decline for A0 years.
If the consequence of this
is a Conservative Party that has
failed to negotiate a deal,
and because of that has seen
a levelling down of those very parts
of the country that just turned blue
at the last election,
that will be an enormous failure,
and I don’t think it
will be forgotten.
Well, look, I just want to say
I’m hopeful that we can
still get a future trading
relationship with Europe.
We will either go to
an Australia—style WHO terms,
or we’ll get the Canada deal...
Which is no deal.
Well, it’s. ..
Australia, Somalia, Ethiopia, call
it what you like, but it’s no deal.
The key thing is it cannot be a deal
at any price, and what I worry
about from what Lisa
is saying, if we say, "Oh,
we’ve just got to get
a deal", then we end up surrendering
national interests here.
But people voted to leave
the European Union.
I was a Remainer...
We should be able
to get a good deal.
I accept the British
people voted to leave.
I mean, we were told this would be
the easiest deal in history.
There are opportunities from leaving
the European Union but we have to be
able to realise those through having
a Canada—style deal where
we can set our own rules.
If you take an area that I’m
responsible for, for example,
the digital economy,
there are huge opportunities
for trading, huge opportunities
with ﬂows of data with
the United States,
with China, with India.
We have to have the freedom to be
able to set our own policies,
and if we can do that we can seize
the brighter opportunity.
We can’tjust take a deal at any
cost, and Ifear that the Labour
policy of simply signalling
that we just want a deal would mean
that we won’t get the opportunity...
You said you would deliver
an oven—ready Brexit deal,
but you forgot to turn the oven on.
And here we are, a year
later, and you’ve made
precisely zero progress.
It’s great rhetoric, Lisa,
but actually we left
the European Union, we entered
the transition period,
we had a dealfor that.
What we’re talking about now
is our future trading
relationship...
And you haven’t made any progress
on those key objectives.
the best way to get a future
trading relationship in the
interests of the UK
is to be willing to say,
"We won’t have a
deal at any cost".
I still believe we can get that
deal, but we have to
hang firm and make it clear
that we will get the right deal.
I’m so bored and exasperated
with all of this!
Are you trying to say
this debate is boring?
LAUGHTER
No, I’m sorry.
I’m a bit of an outsider
on this one, I accept,
but itjust seems to me,
broadly speaking,
everyone seems happy
that is going to happen,
it’s not going to happen yet.
We just have to wait
until it’s less politically
embarrassing to concede to the EU
than it is to admit that you haven’t
got a deal.
I mean, that’s sort of, like,
how it looks from the outside
and Ijust...
It’s very frustrating.
It’s frustrating that
everyone is in this period
of uncertainty while that happens.
And, Rose, of course, we are waiting
for the US election results.
There is a lot of talk about,
if Biden wins, and at the moment
he’s looking on track like he may
well do that, that the UK may not be
exactly top of the diplomacy trade
priority list if we haven’t got
a deal with the EU.
How does it look to you?
It looks still like a lot
of posturing and still like a lot
of empty promises, and still like,
you know, just get it done.
If this is what you’re going to do
then you should’ve had this done.
You should have turned on the oven,
you should have checked
on your food, on your baked goods,
and be ready to bring
it out of the oven.
Because if Simon at Next can do it
then surely the Government
can figure it out too.
All this oven talk is actually
making me feel really hungry,
actually.
I’m hungry!
We all getting hungry now.
Gabriel?
What I was going to ask is,
now that we are looking at
Brexit in conjunction
with lockdown, can the UK
afford to not have a deal?
Well, that’s a central question,
that’s what we are dealing
with here, isn’t it?
Alex, you had your hand up too.
I was just going to comment
on the financial services
industry, which is actually
the industry I work in.
If we leave without a deal,
there is going to be
no access to financial services
to European markets, which is a huge
blow for a lot of firms that
were out of the US into the UK,
and that doesn’t seem
to be recognised.
I know it’s not a popular industry,
but it is worth billions and
billions and billions
to the UK economy.
So how does the Government proposed
to address that lack of
access if there is no deal?
David?
Thanks, Fiona.
I agree with the Secretary
of State’s comment that no deal
is better than a bad deal,
in effect, but what I’m not clear
on is what the argument is for not
trying to negotiate a short
extension to the exit negotiations,
given the international crisis
we are going through.
So why not get an extension,
given that we are in
the middle of a pandemic?
And what about Alex’s point
about the financial services?
Well, I think, to the point
about an extension,
it goes to your point, Hannah.
People are fed up with Brexit —
they voted to get this thing
done in 2016.
We are now almost in 2021.
We just have to deliver.
Alex is absolutely right
about the value of our financial
services, and of course we continue
to negotiate with Europe.
It’s also worth noting
that the London financial service
industry and financial services up
and down the country
are tremendously innovative,
and I am confident that they will be
able to adapt to
those circumstances.
We have been a world
leader for centuries
because of the huge skills we have,
whether it’s at the law
firms, the accountancy firms.
All of them come together,
and I’m confident they
will be able to adapt.
50, Alex, are you confident
you’re going to adapt?
You are in this industry.
I think it’s very difficult.
I mean, there are some financial
services firms that will be fine
because they don’t rely on Europe
for their income,
but there are others.
Like I say, I am familiar with quite
a few firms, for example,
that come over from the States,
establish themselves
in the UK to access Europe,
and then when we leave
they will leave, and so
we are losing billions
of pounds to Germany,
to Holland, and European
bases are being set up
in places other than the UK,
which is not only money
going off their shores, but
alsojobs.
And I don’t see how in the next
month and a half the Government
are going to get a comprehensive
deal on financial services.
You know, we’ve been watching
this for years, and it
doesn’t seem to have progressed
at all, to be honest with you.
Well, I think we could discuss
this for some time.
We could put you on the spot again,
Oliver, but our time is up,
you might be glad to know.
So tonight our questions
came from Lewisham.
Next week we’ll be joined
by our variance audience in Dover,
and the week after that in Windsor.
So if you want to be part
of our virtual audience,
do get in touch on the Question Time
website, and let’s hear
what you’ve got to say.
Adrian Chiles and guests
are coming up, as always,
on Question Time Extra Time.
That’s on 5 Live now, and you can
see on the screen how to get in
touch and put your points there.
But I just want to
say, for now, thank
you very much to our panel
for coming into that.
And thank you very much to Jan,
who we met earlier on
at the top of the programme.
And thank you very
much to Rose, and I
must say, given that
you broke your wrist yesterday,
and you are doing this programme
especially for us, we
are very grateful — what a trooper.
So thank you very much to you.
Thank you to the
audience in Lewisham,
thank you very much forjoining us.
And of course thank
you to you at home for watching.
From Question Time, goodbye.
APPLAUSE
I’ve come to realise, as a grandson
of a Holocaust survivor,
that our stories bear witness
to some painful truths.
But they’re also full of light,
of truth and of resilience.
Thank you for being with me today.
This season,
the FA Cup is different.
No draws, only winners and losers.
Every game is final,
and penalties await.
If you’re not up for it, you’re out.
The FA Cup: zero filler.
Starts with FC United of Manchester
v Doncaster Rovers.
# I will try to fix you... #
THEY CHEER
Oh, my goodness!
You’re a magician! You are amazing!
There is a bit of a slide war
going on, war by PowerPoint,
at the top of government.
A chart—off.
A chart—off, yes!
So, basically, on Saturday,
we had Chris being watched
by M million people,
and Whitty and Vallance
showing these slides that
you just couldn’t read,
and then, Chris, today the UK
Statistics Authority kind of giving
them a bit of a smack
on the wrists, didn’t they?
They did, yeah.
16 million, by the way.
Just to give you a
smack on the wrist!
Sorry!
I should have been more accurate.
Yeah, I know.
I was just saving you
a rebuke next week.
So, yeah, they did, and then there’s
that broader point, isn’t there,
which is when you have those "Next
slide, please" moments,
and somebody off—screen
clicking the clicker,
you’rejust left, aren’t
you, as a viewer, just
overwhelmed, really?
Particularly when you get those kind
of colour scheme ones,
like you would get in a paint shop.
When actually, you know,
the old mantra, less is more,
you know, they might be
onto something with that.
Then Simon Stevens,
the chief exec of the NHS,
swoops in and does his own smack
down at the Downing Street
press C0 nfe re nce .
Smack down!
Like you, and I’m sure
that the Prime Minister
won’t mind me saying so,
I’ve watched a number
of these press briefings,
and sometimes the charts can be
a bit hard to keep up with,
so I’ve just got one chart today
that indisputably sets out
what we in the health
service are seeing.
And if we can have that,
that one chart, please?
What it shows is the number
of patients that are being looked
after in hospitals across England.
Vicki, you were doing
the press conference.
Did the sass just
emanate off the screen?
Well, it was funny because Boris
Johnson was laughing when he talked
about how the slides
were all quite confusing.
But then quite a lot
of people have quite
liked Chris Whitty’s
"Next slide, please".
It doesn’t work if it’s
just one, does it?
I mean, you don’t
have that excitement.
Although Simon Stevens
broke his own rule then,
by showing another slide.
Yes, it was all very confusing.
When you’re sitting there doing
the press conference on Zoom,
I can’t even see the slides anyway.
So, I didn’t know what was going on.
Having said he had won,
he then seemed to be
talking about quite a few.
And we’ve all watched hundreds
of hours of American TV,
so we are absolute experts
on TV graphics now.
And we will discuss what those
graphics mean, whether it’s
the American election or coronavirus
in the UK, on this
edition of Newscast.
Hello.
It’s Adam in the studio.
And Vicki also in the studio.
And Chris in my socially distant
booth, down the corridor.
And we are going to talk
about the introduction
of the English lockdown in a bit,
and we’ll also talk quite
a lot about the return
of the furlough scheme,
which Rishi Sunak announced today.
That’s quite a big deal
in terms of the Government’s
handling of the pandemic.
And we’re also going to talk loads
about the American election.
And we have managed...
Last week, we spoke
to George Osborne.
We’ve got somebody who’s spent a lot
of time arguing with him...
Ed Balls, former Shadow
Chancellor, and Strictly
contestant, and Harvard University
fellow, and bit of an American
politics geek — am I right?
And maker of programmes
about Donald Trump for the BBC.
Indeed.
And we’re going to see some
of the best bits of that documentary
you’ve made in a minute.
Now, I hope somebody,
if you are listening to this
or watching it on iPlayer
in the future, you know
the result of the American
presidential election,
because we here now
are still waiting.
And, Chris, it seems to me
that the story is Biden is closing
in on the 270 electoral college
votes, Trump is challenging
in as many states as he can,
but we’re still basically waiting
for some of the key ones to just
declare, and then this bit
of the process will be over?
Yeah, and Ijust keep bumping
into people who look
absolutely rough as anything,
because they didn’t get any sleep
whatsoever over the past 48 hours,
and they are beginning to wonder
whether it was worthwhile, given
we are still in the "Mm" territory.
But it was all very exciting
and lots of American anchors getting